Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: nitrous oxide and xenon.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to nitrous oxide and xenon. Begin with nitrous oxide — its identity and
physical properties.
Nitrous oxide is an inorganic gas, dinitrogen monoxide,
a colourless gas with a faintly sweet smell,
used as an anaesthetic adjunct and analgesic.
It is supplied in cylinders in which it is stored as a liquid in equilibrium with
its vapour, because its critical temperature is above room temperature,
so the cylinder pressure stays constant until the liquid is exhausted and does not
reflect the contents.
It is non-flammable but supports combustion.
Pharmacologically it is a weak anaesthetic but a good analgesic:
its minimum alveolar concentration is around one hundred and four per cent,
so it cannot produce surgical anaesthesia alone at one atmosphere,
and its blood-gas partition coefficient is low, around zero-point-four-seven,
giving rapid onset and offset.
These properties shape both its usefulness and its limitations.
What is its mechanism of action?
Nitrous oxide acts principally as a non-competitive antagonist at the
N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptor,
which is thought to underlie both its anaesthetic and much of its analgesic action,
a mechanism it shares with ketamine and xenon.
Its analgesia also involves the release of endogenous opioid peptides and the
activation of descending noradrenergic inhibitory pathways,
giving it an opioid-like component reversible to some degree by naloxone.
Unlike the volatile agents it has relatively little action at the
gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor.
This distinct, predominantly N-methyl-D-aspartate-antagonist mechanism explains why
it is a strong analgesic but a weak anaesthetic,
and why its effects differ in character from the gamma-aminobutyric-acid-ergic
agents.
Explain the concentration effect, second-gas effect and diffusion hypoxia as they
apply to nitrous oxide.
Because nitrous oxide is given in high concentration and taken up in large volumes,
it shows these bulk-uptake phenomena prominently.
The concentration effect is that its high inspired concentration,
through the large uptake reducing alveolar volume and drawing in fresh gas,
makes its own alveolar concentration rise rapidly.
The second-gas effect is that this large uptake concentrates and accelerates the
uptake of a co-administered volatile agent, speeding induction.
Diffusion hypoxia is the mirror image at offset:
when nitrous oxide is discontinued,
large volumes diffuse out of the blood into the alveoli,
diluting alveolar oxygen and carbon dioxide and risking hypoxaemia,
which is prevented by giving a high concentration of oxygen for the first few
minutes of recovery.
So its high-volume uptake drives all three effects.
Why and how does nitrous oxide expand air-filled spaces?
Nitrous oxide is about thirty times more soluble in blood than nitrogen,
so when a patient breathing nitrous oxide has an air-filled space,
the nitrous oxide diffuses into that space from the blood much faster than the
nitrogen within it can diffuse out, so the volume or, in a non-compliant space,
the pressure rises.
In compliant spaces the volume increases; in rigid spaces the pressure increases.
This produces clinically important expansion of any air-containing cavity.
The effect is greater the higher the nitrous oxide concentration and the longer the
exposure, and it is the basis of several contraindications.
What are the clinical consequences and contraindications of that expansion?
The expansion of air-filled spaces makes nitrous oxide hazardous in several
situations. It enlarges a pneumothorax,
potentially converting it to a tension pneumothorax,
so it is avoided where a pneumothorax may be present,
including in trauma and after certain procedures.
It distends the bowel, which is dangerous in bowel obstruction and impairs surgical
access in abdominal surgery. It raises middle-ear pressure,
relevant in middle-ear surgery and risking tympanic disruption.
It expands an intra-ocular gas bubble used in retinal surgery, threatening vision.
It enlarges an air embolism, worsening its effects.
And it increases the pressure in tracheal-tube and other cuffs.
So nitrous oxide is contraindicated or avoided wherever an enclosed gas space could
be dangerously expanded.
Describe its cardiovascular, respiratory and central nervous system effects.
Nitrous oxide has a mild direct myocardial depressant effect,
which is largely offset by a degree of sympathetic stimulation,
so that in most patients it has little net effect on the cardiovascular system,
though the depression may be unmasked in the critically ill or those with poor
ventricular function, and it can raise pulmonary vascular resistance.
Its respiratory effects are modest,
with a small increase in rate and decrease in tidal volume,
and it potentiates the respiratory depression of co-administered agents.
In the central nervous system it is a cerebral vasodilator that increases cerebral
blood flow and can raise intracranial pressure,
a consideration in neuroanaesthesia, and it provides analgesia.
So its own organ effects are relatively mild,
which is part of its appeal as an adjunct, but not negligible.
Explain the effect of nitrous oxide on vitamin B-twelve and methionine synthase.
Nitrous oxide irreversibly oxidises the cobalt atom of vitamin B-twelve,
inactivating it as a cofactor for the enzyme methionine synthase,
which converts homocysteine to methionine and is essential for the synthesis of
methionine, tetrahydrofolate and ultimately thymidine and DNA.
Prolonged or repeated exposure therefore impairs DNA synthesis and methylation.
The clinical consequences are a megaloblastic anaemia and bone-marrow depression
with prolonged exposure, and, with repeated or chronic exposure or abuse,
a subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord and a peripheral neuropathy.
There are also concerns about effects on the fetus and on those with pre-existing
B-twelve deficiency. This vitamin-B-twelve interaction is a distinctive and serious
toxicity of nitrous oxide, particularly with prolonged or repeated use and in
deficiency.
What is Entonox, and how is it used?
Entonox is a ready-mixed gas of fifty per cent nitrous oxide and fifty per cent
oxygen in a single cylinder, used as an inhaled analgesic that is self-administered
through a demand valve.
It provides rapid-onset, rapid-offset analgesia with a guaranteed fifty per cent
oxygen, and is widely used in labour,
in the emergency department and pre-hospital setting,
and for brief painful procedures such as dressing changes.
A practical hazard is that at low temperatures the two gases can separate — the
nitrous oxide liquefying, a phenomenon related to the Poynting effect — so that a
hypoxic or a hyperoxic mixture could be delivered;
this is prevented by storing the cylinders above a minimum temperature and
inverting them before use to remix.
So Entonox is a convenient, self-titrated analgesic with this specific storage
caution.
What are the occupational and environmental concerns with nitrous oxide?
Occupationally, chronic exposure of staff to nitrous oxide raises concern because
of its effect on vitamin B-twelve and methionine synthase,
with potential haematological, neurological and reproductive effects,
so scavenging and good theatre ventilation are important to limit exposure.
Environmentally, nitrous oxide is both a potent greenhouse gas with a long
atmospheric lifetime and an ozone-depleting substance,
and the large quantities used, particularly through piped manifold systems with
their leaks, make it a significant contributor to the carbon footprint of
anaesthesia.
These concerns, together with its toxicity and the availability of alternatives,
have driven a marked reduction in its use,
the decommissioning of leaking manifold systems in favour of cylinders,
and a reconsideration of its routine role.
Given all this, what is the current place of nitrous oxide?
Nitrous oxide retains a place but a diminishing one.
As an analgesic it remains valuable, especially as Entonox for labour,
emergency and procedural analgesia, where its rapid, self-titrated,
opioid-sparing analgesia with guaranteed oxygen is hard to match.
As an anaesthetic adjunct its additive minimum alveolar concentration,
second-gas effect and analgesia were long exploited,
but its expansion of air spaces, its vitamin-B-twelve toxicity,
its contribution to nausea, and above all its environmental impact and the
availability of alternatives have led many to abandon its routine use in
maintenance.
So its role is now chiefly analgesic, particularly as Entonox,
with its use as a carrier gas in maintenance much reduced on toxicity and
environmental grounds.
Now xenon. What is it, and why is it of interest?
Xenon is an inert noble gas, present in trace amounts in the atmosphere from which
it is extracted, and it is of interest because it comes remarkably close to the
ideal inhalational anaesthetic.
It is an anaesthetic and analgesic acting principally by
N-methyl-D-aspartate-receptor antagonism, like nitrous oxide and ketamine.
Its great attractions are an extremely low blood-gas partition coefficient,
around zero-point-one-one-five, the lowest of all the agents,
giving the fastest onset and offset; outstanding cardiovascular stability;
analgesia; neuroprotective and organ-protective properties;
an absence of metabolism and of teratogenicity; and environmental inertness,
since it is a naturally occurring gas that does no atmospheric harm.
These properties make it almost the ideal agent,
which is why it has attracted so much interest despite its drawbacks.
Tell me its key properties and effects in more detail.
Xenon's minimum alveolar concentration is around sixty-three to seventy-one per
cent, so it is more potent than nitrous oxide and can approach surgical
anaesthesia, though high concentrations limit the inspired oxygen.
Its very low solubility gives the most rapid induction and emergence of any agent.
Haemodynamically it is exceptionally stable,
with minimal effect on myocardial contractility, heart rate or blood pressure,
making it attractive for the cardiovascularly fragile.
It provides analgesia through its N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonism and does not
depress respiration as much as might be expected.
It is not metabolised, so it has no organ toxicity and does not trigger malignant
hyperthermia, and it is not teratogenic.
It has been studied for neuroprotection after brain injury and cardiac arrest and
for organ protection, where its N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonism may limit
excitotoxic injury.
What are the drawbacks that limit its use?
The principal obstacle is cost and scarcity:
xenon must be extracted in tiny quantities from the atmosphere by fractional
distillation of liquefied air, making it very expensive,
and this demands its administration in a closed-circuit,
recycling system to conserve it, with the attendant complexity and equipment cost.
Like nitrous oxide it expands air-filled spaces,
since it too is more soluble than nitrogen, so the same contraindications apply.
It is a dense gas, which increases the work of breathing and airway resistance.
And the high concentrations needed for anaesthesia limit the inspired oxygen.
So despite being pharmacologically close to ideal, xenon's expense,
the need for closed-circuit delivery,
its density and its expansion of gas spaces have confined it to limited and
specialist use rather than routine practice.
Compare nitrous oxide and xenon directly.
Both are N-methyl-D-aspartate-antagonist gases providing analgesia and rapid
kinetics, and both expand air-filled spaces.
Xenon is superior in almost every respect: it is more potent,
with a lower minimum alveolar concentration approaching surgical anaesthesia;
it has the lower solubility and so faster kinetics;
it is far more cardiovascularly stable;
it is not metabolised and has no vitamin-B-twelve toxicity,
no malignant-hyperthermia risk and no teratogenicity;
and it is environmentally inert, whereas nitrous oxide is a potent greenhouse and
ozone-depleting gas with significant toxicity.
The decisive advantage of nitrous oxide is purely practical:
it is cheap and readily available, whereas xenon is scarce and very expensive and
needs closed-circuit delivery.
So xenon is the better drug but nitrous oxide the affordable one,
which is why xenon remains a fascinating but niche agent.
Pull it together: how do you regard these two agents in current practice?
I regard nitrous oxide as an agent of declining role:
still genuinely useful as an analgesic,
above all as Entonox in labour and for procedural and emergency analgesia,
but with its routine use as an anaesthetic carrier gas increasingly abandoned
because of its expansion of air spaces, its vitamin-B-twelve toxicity,
its contribution to nausea, and its substantial environmental impact,
with safer alternatives available.
Xenon I regard as the agent that comes closest to the ideal — rapid, stable,
analgesic, protective, non-toxic and environmentally inert — but whose cost,
scarcity and need for closed-circuit delivery keep it from routine use,
confining it to research and to occasional specialist application where its unique
properties justify the expense.
Both illustrate, in opposite ways, how the practical realities of cost,
toxicity and the environment shape which agents we actually use.
Give a little of the history and the manufacture of nitrous oxide.
Nitrous oxide was first prepared by Priestley in the eighteenth century,
its analgesic and intoxicant properties explored by Humphry Davy,
who coined the term laughing gas and suggested its surgical use,
and it was introduced into clinical anaesthesia by the dentist Horace Wells in the
eighteen-forties, making it one of the very first anaesthetic agents.
It is manufactured commercially by the controlled thermal decomposition of ammonium
nitrate, which yields nitrous oxide and water,
the product being purified to remove toxic oxides of nitrogen.
It is then compressed and stored as a liquid in cylinders.
This long history makes it one of the oldest agents still in use,
though its role is now contracting for the toxicity and environmental reasons we
have discussed.
Explain the cylinder behaviour, the filling ratio and the pseudo-critical
phenomenon.
Because the critical temperature of nitrous oxide is above normal room temperature,
it is stored in the cylinder as a liquid in equilibrium with its vapour,
so the gauge pressure reflects the saturated vapour pressure and stays constant
while liquid remains, falling only once all the liquid has evaporated;
the contents are therefore judged by weight, not pressure.
The cylinder is filled to a defined filling ratio,
the mass of nitrous oxide relative to the mass of water that would fill it,
kept below a safe limit to avoid dangerous pressures if it warms.
As liquid evaporates to supply gas,
the latent heat of vaporisation cools the cylinder,
which can cause ice to form on the outside and reduces the delivery pressure.
In the Entonox cylinder, the oxygen dissolved in the liquid nitrous oxide can
separate at low temperature — the lamination or pseudo-critical phenomenon —
risking delivery of a variable mixture.
Quantify how quickly nitrous oxide expands a closed gas space.
The rate and extent of expansion depend on the inspired concentration of nitrous
oxide and on whether the space is compliant or rigid.
In a compliant space, breathing a high concentration of nitrous oxide such as
seventy-five per cent can roughly double the volume of an air-filled space within a
short time and treble it with longer exposure,
because the nitrous oxide entering from the blood greatly exceeds the nitrogen
leaving.
In a rigid, non-compliant space the pressure rather than the volume rises,
potentially to dangerous levels. The effect is rapid for accessible spaces such as
a pneumothorax or the bowel and slower for poorly perfused ones.
This quantitative behaviour is why even moderate concentrations are hazardous where
a significant closed gas space exists,
and why nitrous oxide is discontinued well before such concerns arise.
What does the ENIGMA research tell us about nitrous oxide?
The ENIGMA trials examined the consequences of using nitrous oxide in general
anaesthesia.
The first suggested that avoiding nitrous oxide, by using a higher inspired oxygen,
was associated with fewer postoperative complications including less nausea and
vomiting and wound and pulmonary problems, raising concern about its routine use.
The larger follow-up trial, which focused on patients with or at risk of
cardiovascular disease and tested the theoretical concern that nitrous oxide,
by raising homocysteine through its effect on methionine synthase,
might increase cardiovascular events,
did not find an increase in major cardiovascular complications or death
attributable to nitrous oxide, though nausea was more common with it.
So the evidence reassures on the cardiovascular safety of single perioperative
exposure while confirming its contribution to nausea,
and overall it has supported a more sparing use of the gas.
What are the concerns about nitrous oxide in pregnancy and the fetus?
The concern arises from the inactivation of vitamin B-twelve and methionine
synthase, enzymes essential for DNA synthesis and methylation and so for cell
division, which is most active in the developing embryo and fetus.
Animal evidence raised concern about teratogenicity with prolonged exposure,
particularly in early pregnancy, and there is theoretical concern about effects on
the fetus and on fertility, and about occupational exposure of pregnant staff.
In practice nitrous oxide is generally avoided where possible in the first
trimester and prolonged exposure is avoided in pregnancy, although brief use,
including Entonox in labour, is considered acceptable,
the fetus being delivered and the exposure brief.
So the vitamin-B-twelve interaction underlies a cautious approach to nitrous oxide
in early pregnancy and to occupational exposure.
Discuss recreational use of nitrous oxide and its harms.
Nitrous oxide is misused recreationally,
inhaled from small cartridges or larger canisters for its brief euphoriant effect,
a practice that has become widespread. The acute risks include hypoxia and asphyxia
from inhaling the gas without oxygen, and injury from its effects.
The serious harm, however, comes from repeated heavy use,
which through the inactivation of vitamin B-twelve and methionine synthase causes a
functional B-twelve deficiency with a peripheral neuropathy and subacute combined
degeneration of the spinal cord, presenting with numbness, weakness,
unsteadiness and, if unrecognised, permanent neurological disability,
sometimes with megaloblastic anaemia.
Treatment is cessation and vitamin B-twelve replacement.
This pattern of neurological injury from recreational nitrous oxide has become an
increasingly recognised clinical problem,
and it is the same mechanism that underlies the occupational and prolonged-exposure
concerns.
What are the effects of nitrous oxide on the pulmonary and cerebral circulations,
and the relevant cautions?
Nitrous oxide increases pulmonary vascular resistance,
which is of little consequence in the normal circulation but can be significant in
the patient with pre-existing pulmonary hypertension or right ventricular
impairment, in whom the rise in afterload on the right heart may be poorly
tolerated, so it is used cautiously or avoided in such patients.
In the cerebral circulation it is a vasodilator that increases cerebral blood flow
and cerebral blood volume and can raise intracranial pressure,
a concern in the patient with raised intracranial pressure or undergoing
neurosurgery, and it can expand a pneumocephalus,
for instance after posterior-fossa or other intracranial surgery in which air has
entered the cranium.
So pulmonary hypertension and intracranial pathology are both reasons to limit or
avoid nitrous oxide.
Why does the minimum alveolar concentration of nitrous oxide exceed one hundred per
cent, and what follows from that?
A minimum alveolar concentration of around one hundred and four per cent means
that, even if a patient breathed pure nitrous oxide,
the partial pressure achieved at one atmosphere would be slightly below that needed
to prevent movement in half of subjects,
so nitrous oxide cannot produce surgical anaesthesia alone at one atmosphere — it
is a weak anaesthetic.
What follows is that it is used as an adjunct,
contributing part of the anaesthetic requirement through the additivity of minimum
alveolar concentration alongside a volatile or intravenous agent,
while providing analgesia and speeding the onset of a co-administered volatile
through the second-gas effect.
So its high minimum alveolar concentration defines its role as a supplement rather
than a sole agent, valued for its analgesia and its kinetic effects rather than for
its own anaesthetic potency.
Summarise the analgesic uses of nitrous oxide as Entonox.
As Entonox, the fifty-fifty mixture with oxygen,
nitrous oxide is a widely used inhaled analgesic,
self-administered through a demand valve so that the patient controls it and
excessive sedation is self-limiting. Its rapid onset and offset suit intermittent
and procedural pain.
It is a mainstay of labour analgesia,
providing useful pain relief that the mother titrates to her contractions without
effects on the progress of labour or, in brief use, on the neonate.
It is used in the emergency department and pre-hospital setting for the pain of
trauma and of procedures, and on the ward for brief painful interventions such as
dressing changes and drain removal.
Its guaranteed fifty per cent oxygen,
self-administration and rapid kinetics make it a safe, convenient,
opioid-sparing analgesic, which is the context in which nitrous oxide most clearly
retains its value.
Now xenon — give some background to its anaesthetic use.
Xenon was identified as an anaesthetic in the mid-twentieth century,
its anaesthetic properties in humans demonstrated in the nineteen-fifties,
but its expense and the lack of suitable delivery and recycling technology long
confined it to experiment.
Renewed interest came with the recognition of its near-ideal pharmacological
profile and with the development of closed-circuit anaesthetic systems able to
conserve and recycle the costly gas,
and it has been licensed for anaesthesia in some countries.
Its mechanism, principally N-methyl-D-aspartate-receptor antagonism with additional
actions on two-pore potassium channels and nicotinic receptors,
distinguishes it from the volatile agents.
So xenon has a long-known but only recently practicable anaesthetic application,
its adoption gated by the economics of delivering an extremely scarce and expensive
gas.
Expand on xenon's neuroprotective and organ-protective interest.
Xenon's N-methyl-D-aspartate-receptor antagonism,
by limiting the glutamate-mediated excitotoxic injury that follows ischaemia and
hypoxia, gives it experimental neuroprotective and organ-protective properties,
and unlike some other N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonists it appears to lack
significant neurotoxicity or psychotomimetic effect.
This has prompted study of xenon for the protection of the brain after cardiac
arrest, in neonatal hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy in combination with
therapeutic hypothermia, and in traumatic brain injury,
and for the protection of the heart and kidney.
The clinical results have so far been mixed and have not established xenon in
routine protective use, but the biological rationale is sound and the research
continues.
This protective potential, added to its anaesthetic virtues,
is a large part of why xenon attracts interest out of proportion to its limited
current use.
Explain why xenon's cost and delivery shape its practice,
and its physical drawbacks.
Xenon is present in the atmosphere only in trace amounts and is won by the
fractional distillation of liquefied air,
an energy-intensive process yielding tiny quantities,
which makes it extremely expensive — far costlier than conventional agents.
This economics dictates that it be delivered in a closed-circuit,
low-flow system that recycles the gas to avoid waste,
adding equipment and complexity, since open delivery would be prohibitively costly.
Physically, xenon is a dense gas, so it increases airway resistance and the work of
breathing, a consideration particularly in spontaneous ventilation.
Like nitrous oxide it is more soluble than nitrogen and expands air-filled spaces,
so the same contraindications apply.
And the high concentrations needed limit the inspired oxygen.
So despite its pharmacological excellence, cost,
the need for closed-circuit delivery,
density and gas-space expansion confine xenon to specialist and research use.
Give a final comparative judgement of these N-methyl-D-aspartate-antagonist gases
against the volatile agents.
These gases occupy a distinct place.
Both nitrous oxide and xenon work mainly by N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonism,
giving analgesia as well as anaesthesia,
in contrast to the predominantly gamma-aminobutyric-acid-ergic volatile agents,
and both have low solubility and rapid kinetics, and both expand air spaces.
Nitrous oxide is a weak anaesthetic but useful analgesic, cheap and available,
but burdened by vitamin-B-twelve toxicity, nausea and a heavy environmental impact,
so its routine anaesthetic use is declining while its analgesic use as Entonox
persists.
Xenon is pharmacologically close to ideal — potent enough,
fastest in onset and offset, cardiovascularly stable, analgesic, protective,
non-toxic and environmentally inert — but is kept from routine use by cost,
scarcity and the need for closed-circuit delivery.
So neither displaces the volatile agents in routine practice,
but each illustrates a different mechanistic and practical niche.
How large is nitrous oxide's contribution to postoperative nausea and vomiting,
and why?
Nitrous oxide makes a modest but real contribution to postoperative nausea and
vomiting, increasing its incidence to a degree that becomes more apparent with
longer exposure.
The mechanisms proposed include direct effects on the central emetic pathways and
the chemoreceptor trigger zone, effects mediated by opioid and other receptors,
changes in middle-ear pressure stimulating the vestibular apparatus,
and bowel distension.
The effect is enough that avoiding nitrous oxide measurably reduces nausea,
as the ENIGMA work showed, and that it is reasonably omitted in patients at high
risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting or given prophylactic antiemetics when it
is used.
So while not a dominant emetic, nitrous oxide adds to the risk,
and this is one of the several minor strikes against its routine use as a carrier
gas.
What are the specific concerns with nitrous oxide in middle-ear and sinus surgery,
and in laparoscopy?
In middle-ear surgery nitrous oxide diffuses into the air-filled middle ear faster
than nitrogen leaves, raising the pressure,
which can displace a tympanic graft or disrupt the repair,
and on discontinuation the reabsorption produces a negative pressure;
for these reasons nitrous oxide is avoided or discontinued well before graft
placement in middle-ear surgery, and similar considerations apply to the air-filled
sinuses.
In laparoscopy, where the peritoneum is insufflated,
nitrous oxide can diffuse into the pneumoperitoneum,
and although carbon dioxide is the insufflating gas,
any air-filled viscus or a gas embolism would be expanded.
So the gas-space expansion makes nitrous oxide a concern in any surgery involving
closed or insufflated air spaces, middle-ear surgery being the classic example.
Contrast nitrous oxide's kinetics with those of the volatile agents.
Nitrous oxide has a very low blood-gas partition coefficient,
around zero-point-four-seven, lower than all the volatile agents except that it is
comparable to desflurane, so its onset and offset are rapid and its alveolar
concentration rises quickly.
Combined with the concentration effect of giving it in high concentration,
this makes nitrous oxide kinetically fast,
and through the second-gas effect it accelerates a co-administered volatile.
The essential difference from the volatile agents is not its kinetics,
which are similar to the fastest of them,
but its weak potency — a minimum alveolar concentration above one hundred per cent
— and its different, N-methyl-D-aspartate-antagonist mechanism with prominent
analgesia.
So nitrous oxide behaves kinetically like a fast,
insoluble agent but functionally as an analgesic adjunct rather than a complete
anaesthetic.
Summarise nitrous oxide's haematological and bone-marrow effects.
Through the inactivation of vitamin B-twelve and methionine synthase,
and so the impairment of DNA synthesis in dividing cells,
prolonged nitrous oxide exposure depresses the bone marrow,
producing megaloblastic changes and, with sufficient exposure,
a megaloblastic anaemia and leucopenia;
the marrow is affected because its cells divide rapidly.
This was first recognised in patients exposed to nitrous oxide for prolonged
periods, such as in intensive care,
and it is a reason prolonged or repeated administration is avoided.
The same biochemical lesion underlies the neurological injury of chronic exposure
and abuse.
The haematological effect is generally reversible on cessation and with vitamin
B-twelve, but it reinforces that nitrous oxide is unsuited to prolonged or repeated
use and is a hazard in those already B-twelve deficient.
How is nitrous oxide supplied in hospitals,
and why does that matter environmentally?
Nitrous oxide has traditionally been supplied through piped manifold systems
delivering it from banks of large cylinders to outlets throughout the hospital.
It has emerged that these manifold systems leak substantially,
so that a large proportion of the nitrous oxide purchased never reaches a patient
but escapes to the atmosphere, where,
as a potent greenhouse and ozone-depleting gas,
it contributes disproportionately to the carbon footprint of healthcare.
This recognition has driven the decommissioning of leaking manifolds in favour of
supplying nitrous oxide in smaller portable cylinders used at the point of care,
and the auditing and reduction of nitrous oxide use generally.
So the mode of supply, not only the clinical use, is an environmental issue,
and addressing manifold waste is one of the most effective sustainability measures
in anaesthesia.
What are xenon's effects on the electroencephalogram and the quality of emergence?
Xenon produces dose-dependent changes on the electroencephalogram consistent with
anaesthesia, and depth can be monitored as with other agents.
Its very low solubility gives a notably rapid and clear-headed emergence,
faster than the volatile agents, which is one of its practical attractions,
and recovery is generally smooth.
Combined with its cardiovascular stability and analgesia, this rapid,
lucid recovery makes xenon attractive in principle for the elderly and the frail,
in whom a prompt return of clear cognition is valuable,
and there has been interest in whether it causes less postoperative cognitive
disturbance.
So xenon's kinetic excellence translates into a rapid, good-quality emergence,
adding to the catalogue of its near-ideal properties that are nonetheless
outweighed in routine practice by its cost and delivery requirements.
Is nitrous oxide used in paediatric and dental practice?
Yes — nitrous oxide has long been used in paediatric and dental settings for its
analgesic and anxiolytic effect.
In dentistry, low concentrations of nitrous oxide in oxygen are used for
inhalational sedation, sometimes called relative analgesia,
to relieve anxiety and pain for dental procedures,
valued for its rapid onset and offset and the rapid recovery allowing the patient
to leave unaccompanied.
In paediatric practice nitrous oxide,
including as Entonox in the cooperative older child,
provides analgesia for brief painful procedures.
The cautions are the usual ones — avoidance where gas spaces could expand,
attention to scavenging and occupational exposure,
and avoidance of prolonged or repeated use — but in these brief,
self-limited applications nitrous oxide remains useful,
again chiefly for its analgesic and anxiolytic rather than its anaesthetic action.
Give a closing perspective on whether nitrous oxide should still be used.
My perspective is that nitrous oxide is a drug of narrowing but not abolished
indication.
Its analgesic use, above all as Entonox in labour,
in the emergency and pre-hospital setting and for brief procedures,
remains genuinely valuable and hard to replace, offering rapid, self-titrated,
opioid-sparing analgesia with guaranteed oxygen.
Its use as a routine anaesthetic carrier gas, by contrast,
is increasingly difficult to justify, given its expansion of air spaces,
its vitamin-B-twelve toxicity, its contribution to nausea,
the occupational concerns, and above all its substantial and avoidable
environmental impact through both use and manifold leakage,
when effective alternatives exist.
So I would retain nitrous oxide for its specific analgesic strengths while
abandoning its routine anaesthetic use and addressing the wastage in its supply,
which is broadly the direction practice is taking.
Explain the homocysteine concern that prompted the cardiovascular studies of
nitrous oxide.
The concern follows directly from the inactivation of methionine synthase.
That enzyme converts homocysteine to methionine,
so inhibiting it causes homocysteine to accumulate,
and a raised homocysteine concentration is associated with endothelial dysfunction,
a prothrombotic tendency and an increased cardiovascular risk.
It was therefore hypothesised that nitrous oxide, by acutely raising homocysteine,
might increase perioperative myocardial ischaemia and cardiovascular events,
particularly in patients with cardiac disease.
This biochemical rationale was the basis for the large cardiovascular trial of
nitrous oxide, which, reassuringly,
did not find an increase in major cardiovascular complications attributable to a
single perioperative exposure.
So the homocysteine mechanism gave a plausible reason for concern that prompted
proper study, and the study has largely allayed the specific fear for single
anaesthetic use, while the underlying B-twelve interaction remains a concern for
prolonged and repeated exposure.
What practical safety points attach to the storage and handling of nitrous oxide
cylinders?
Nitrous oxide is stored as a liquid under pressure,
so the cylinder must be handled and stored safely:
kept below the temperature at which pressures become excessive, secured upright,
and protected from heat.
Because the gauge pressure does not fall until the liquid is exhausted,
the contents cannot be judged from the pressure and must be assessed by weighing,
an important practical point to avoid running out unexpectedly.
The gas supports combustion, so cylinders are kept from oil,
grease and ignition sources. The cooling from vaporisation during high-flow use can
cause frosting and reduce output. Cylinders are colour-coded according to national
convention for identification.
And the manifold and Entonox cautions already discussed — leakage and cold
separation — apply. So safe handling reflects its storage as a pressurised
liquefied gas that supports combustion.
Looking ahead, what is the likely future of these two gases?
I expect their trajectories to diverge.
Nitrous oxide will probably continue to retreat from routine anaesthetic use,
its place as a carrier gas eroded by toxicity, nausea and, decisively,
environmental and cost considerations including manifold wastage,
while persisting in its analgesic niche as Entonox,
where no equally convenient alternative exists, and in dentistry and paediatrics.
Xenon will likely remain a fascinating,
near-ideal agent confined to specialist and research use,
its routine adoption blocked by the fundamental economics of an extremely scarce
gas requiring closed-circuit delivery,
unless extraction or recycling becomes far cheaper or its organ-protective promise
is realised in a way that justifies the cost in specific settings.
So nitrous oxide endures as an analgesic while fading as an anaesthetic,
and xenon remains the agent that is pharmacologically ideal but practically
marginal.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Nitrous oxide is a weak anaesthetic (MAC ~104%) but good analgesic,
acting mainly by NMDA antagonism with an endogenous-opioid component;
its low solubility gives rapid onset/offset and prominent concentration,
second-gas and diffusion-hypoxia effects.
Second, Being ~30x more soluble than nitrogen,
it expands air-filled spaces — contraindicated in pneumothorax, bowel obstruction,
middle-ear and intra-ocular gas, air embolism, and it distends cuffs.
Third, It inactivates vitamin B12 and methionine synthase,
causing (with prolonged/repeated use) megaloblastic anaemia,
neuropathy and subacute combined degeneration;
it also increases PONV and is a potent greenhouse/ozone-depleting gas.
Fourth, Entonox (50:50 N2O/O2) is a valuable self-administered analgesic for labour
and procedures, with a cold-separation (Poynting) storage caution;
nitrous oxide's routine anaesthetic use is now declining.
Fifth, Xenon (NMDA antagonist, MAC ~63–71%,
blood-gas 0.115) is close to the ideal agent — fastest kinetics,
cardiovascular stability, analgesia, neuroprotection,
no metabolism or teratogenicity, environmentally inert — but cost, scarcity,
closed-circuit need and gas-space expansion limit it.
Thank you. That concludes the station.